Lesson 4 into Carpentries formatting (#2)
carpentries-incubator/r-geospatial-urban: episodes/import-and-visualise-osm-data.Rmd

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Introduction: What is Open Street Map?

Open Street Map (OSM) is a collaborative project which aims at mapping the world and sharing geospatial data in an open way. Anyone can contribute, by mapping geographical objects their encounter, by adding topical information on existing map objects (their name, function, capacity, etc.), or by mapping buildings and roads from satellite imagery (cf. [HOT: Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team](https://www.hotosm.org/)).

This information is then validated by other users and eventually added to the common "map" or information system. This ensures that the information is accessible, open, verified, accurate and up-to-date.

The result looks like this:
![View of OSM web interface](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ClementineCttn/r-geospatial-urban/blob/main/episodes/fig/OSM1.png)

The geospatial data underlying this interface is made of geometrical objects (i.e. points, lines, polygons) and their associated tags (#building #height, #road #secondary #90kph, etc.).

## How to extract geospatial data from Open Street Map?

```{r}
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(leaflet)
library(osmdata)

> library(nominatimlite)

Author: I have left tidyverse and sf for the start and introduced the other ones as we go

```

### Bounding-box

The first thing to do is to define the area within which you want to retrieve data, aka the *bounding box*. This can be defined easily using a place name and the package `nominatimlite` to access the free Nominatim API provided by OpenStreetMap. 

We are going to look at *Brielle* together, but you can also work with the small cities of *Naarden*, *Geertruidenberg*, *Gorinchem*, *Enkhuizen* or *Dokkum*.

N.B. This might not be needed, but ensures that your machine knows it has internet...

```{r}
assign("has_internet_via_proxy", TRUE, environment(curl::has_internet))
```

```{r}
nominatim_polygon <- nominatimlite::geo_lite_sf(address = "Brielle", points_only = FALSE)
bb <- sf::st_bbox(nominatim_polygon)
bb
```

> 

Reviewer: bb <- sf::st_bbox(nominatim_polygon) 

>> this is also done in the beginning of the script, but with little explanation. Is there something going on with the sequence of this script that I dont see or is this (un)intended repetition?

### Word of caution

There might multiple responses from the API query, corresponding to different objects at the same location, or different objects at different locations.
For example: Brielle (Netherlands) and Brielle (New Jersey)

![Brielle, Netherlands](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ClementineCttn/r-geospatial-urban/blob/main/episodes/fig/Brielle_NL.jpeg){width=40%}

![Brielle, New Jersey](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ClementineCttn/r-geospatial-urban/blob/main/episodes/fig/Brielle_NJ.jpeg "Brielle, New Jersey"){width=40%}

We should therefore try to be as unambiguous as possible by adding a country code or district name.

```{r}

> nominatim_polygon <- nominatimlite::geo_lite_sf(address = "Brielle, NL", points_only = FALSE)

Author: I did in the first instance of the workshop.
Since then it does not work as it used to, so I switched to nominatim (and also I like to show where it comes from anyway)

![The Overpass Query Documentation page](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ClementineCttn/r-geospatial-urban/blob/main/episodes/fig/opq.png){width=80%}

On this page we can read about the arguments needed for each function: a bounding box for `opq()` and some `key` and `value` for `add_osm_feature()`. Thanks to the examples provided, we can assume that these keys and values correspond to different levels of tags from the OSM classification. In our case, we will keep it at the first level of classification, with "buildings" as `key`, and no value. We also see from the examples that another function is needed when working with the `sf` package: `osmdata_sf()`. This ensures that the type of object is suited for `sf`. With these tips and examples, we can write our feature extraction function as follows:

```{r}
x <- opq(bbox = bb) %>%
   add_osm_feature(key = 'building') %>%
    osmdata_sf()
```

### Structure of objects

> What is this x object made of? It is a table of all the buildings contained in the bounding box, which gives us their OSM id, their geometry and a range of attributes, such as their name, building material, building date, etc. The completion level of this table depends on user contributions and open resources (here for instance: BAG, different in other countries).

Reviewer 2: @ClementineCttn can you please process this?

> What is this x object made of? It is a table of all the buildings contained in the bounding box, which gives us their OSM id, their geometry and a range of attributes, such as their name, building material, building date, etc. The completion level of this table depends on user contributions and open resources (here for instance: BAG, different in other countries).

Reviewer 2: I see there are more unresolved changes, so please process those too. Thanks!

```{r}

> head(x$osm_polygons)

Reviewer 2: @ClementineCttn can you please process this?

> head(x$osm_polygons)

Author: str() used

```

## Mapping 

Let's map the building age of post-1900 Brielle buildings.

### Projections

First, we are going to select the polygons and reproject them with the Amersfoort/RD New projection, suited for maps centred on the Netherlands. This code for this projection is: 28992.

```{r}
buildings <- x$osm_polygons %>%
  st_transform(.,crs=28992)
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor

> If this does work for some reason, the `buildings` can be found in the data folder: "episodes/data/dataBrielle.shp".

Reviewer 2: @ClementineCttn can you please process this?

> If this does work for some reason, the `buildings` can be found in the data folder: "episodes/data/dataBrielle.shp".

Author: already corrected

> 

Reviewer: If this does work  >> If this _does _not_ work

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Visualisation

> Then we create a variable which a threshold at 1900. Every date prior to 1900 will be recoded 1900, so that buildings older than 1900 will be represented with the same shade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then we create a variable using a threshold at 1900. Every date before 1900 will be recoded as `1900`, so that buildings older than 1900 will be represented with the same shade.
```

> Then we use the `ggplot` function to visualise the buildings by age. The specific function to represent information as a map is `geom_sf()`. The rest works like other graphs and visualisation, with `aes()` for the aesthetics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then we use the `ggplot()` function to visualise the buildings by age. The specific function to represent information as a map is `geom_sf()`. The rest works like other graphs and visualisation, with `aes()` for the aesthetics.
```

```{r}

> buildings$build_date <- as.numeric(
>   if_else(
>     as.numeric(buildings$start_date) < 1900, 
>           1900, 
>           as.numeric(buildings$start_date)
>           )
>   )

Reviewer 2: A more compact way of writing this:

```suggestion
start_date <- as.numeric(buildings$start_date)
buildings$build_date <- if_else(start_date < 1900, 1900, start_date)
```

 ggplot(data = buildings) +
   geom_sf(aes(fill = build_date, colour=build_date))  +
   scale_fill_viridis_c(option = "viridis")+
   scale_colour_viridis_c(option = "viridis")
```

> So this reveals the historical centre of [city] and the various extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So this reveals the historical centre of Brielle (or the city you chose) and the various urban extensions through time.
```

> Anything odd? what? around the centre? Why these limits / isolated points?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anything odd? What? Around the centre? Why these limits / isolated points?
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Challenge: import an interactive basemap layer under the buildings with `Leaflet` (20min)

- Check out the [leaflet package documentation](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/)

> - Plot a basemap in Leaflet and try different tiles. [Basemap documentation](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/basemaps.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Plot a basemap in Leaflet and try different tiles in the [basemap documentation](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/basemaps.html)
```

> - Transform the buildings into WGS84 projection and add them to the basemap layer with the `addPolygons` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Transform the buildings into WGS84 projection and add them to the basemap layer with the `addPolygons()` function.
```

> - Have the `fillColor` of these polygons represent the `build_date` variable. [Choropleth documentation](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/choropleths.html). Using the example and replace the variable names where needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have the `fillColor` of these polygons represent the `build_date` variable. See the [choropleth documentation](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/choropleths.html) for use of colors. Tip: use the examples given in the documentation and replace the variable names where needed.
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

## One solution
 
```{r}
buildings2 <- buildings %>%
  st_transform(.,crs=4326)

leaflet(buildings2) %>%
# addTiles()
  addProviderTiles(providers$CartoDB.Positron) %>%
  addPolygons(color = "#444444", weight = 0.1, smoothFactor = 0.5,
  opacity = 0.2, fillOpacity = 0.8,
  fillColor = ~colorQuantile("YlGnBu", -build_date)(-build_date),
  highlightOptions = highlightOptions(color = "white", weight = 2,
    bringToFront = TRUE))

> ```

Reviewer 2: For some reason, I can see the leaflet map in RStudio but I cannot see it on the rendered webpage. @ClementineCttn, can you please check in your fork if the rendered website displays the leaflet map correctly?

Author: I can see the leaflet map on the webpage (in the challenge solution), but for some reason it's not interactive...

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints 

> - Use the `Nominatim` and `OverPass` APIs within R

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the `Nominatim` and `Overpass` APIs within R
```

> - Use the `osmdata` and `nominatimlite` packages to retrieve geospatial data

Reviewer 2: see my comment about the use of `nominatimlite` above.

Author: I used osmdata::getbb() in the first instance of the workshop.
Since then it does not work as it used to, so I switched to nominatim (and also I like to show where it comes from anyway)
